---
title: "Master's Thesis"
date: 2025-04-07
---
## Thesis Title: Context-Aware Privacy Explanations for Mobility Data Analysis

*Written at the Chair of Mobile Systems, University of Bamberg (Supervisor Prof. Dr. Daniela Nicklas)*

**Abstract**: 

This thesis explores the challenges  of privacy in mobility data, focusing on user comprehension and acceptance of anonymization methods in the context of Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) applications. A mixed-methods experimental study was designed to investigate how explanations of the privacy models *k*-Anonymity and *l*-Diversity, integrated into a MaaS-app prototype, influence user trust, comprehension, and data-sharing decisions. Two explanatory approaches were compared: Context-aware explanations that emphasize the protection of trip-specific sensitive details (e.,g., home and workplace) and neutral explanations without a focus on trip context details. Participant comprehension, trust, and willingness to share data were evaluated, along with perceived sensitivity of different sharing contexts and individual privacy concerns. Results revealed that context-aware explanations, contrary to expectations, did not outperform neutral explanations in fostering comprehension, consent, and trust. Sensitivity for trip details was significantly higher in the context-aware explanation group. Additionally, the effect of a privacy notice without an anonymization model explanation was evaluated. Participant trust and willingness to share data was significantly lower in this condition compared to participants presented with neutral anonymization model explanations. An analysis of user interaction data further demonstrated that the majority of participants across conditions engaged primarily with the first layer of explanations, prioritizing the primary task over detailed privacy-related information. The results offer practical implications for communication of privacy-preserving technologies to foster utility and trust in mobility data sharing.
